---
title: "Validating the Arrhythmogenic Potential of High-, Intermediate-, and Low-Risk Drugs in a Human-Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiac Microphysiological System"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/validating-the-arrhythmogenic
excerpt: 'This study emphasizes the importance of evaluating arrhythmogenic drugs before market approval and highlights the limitations of current in vitro models using two-dimensional (2D) culture formats. The researchers present a three-dimensional (3D) cardiac microphysiological system (MPS) using human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes, which successfully predicted drug cardiotoxicity risks based on changes in action potential duration, beat waveform, and occurrence of proarrhythmic events. The cardiac MPS outperformed existing 2D models and provides a promising platform for rapid and reliable screening of proarrhythmic drug risk.'
date: 2022-07-29
venue: 'ACS Pharmacology &amp; Translational Science'
paperurl: 'http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsptsci.2c00088'
authors:': 'Verena Charwat, Bérénice Charrez, Brian A. Siemons, Henrik Finsberg, Karoline H. Jæger, Andrew G. Edwards, Nathaniel Huebsch, Samuel Wall, Evan Miller, Aslak Tveito, Kevin E. Healy'
---

Evaluation of arrhythmogenic drugs is required by regulatory agencies before any new compound can obtain market approval. Despite rigorous review, cardiac disorders remain the second most common cause for safety-related market withdrawal. On the other hand, false-positive preclinical findings prohibit potentially beneficial candidates from moving forward in the development pipeline. Complex in vitro models using cardiomyocytes derived from human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC-CM) have been identified as a useful tool that allows for rapid and cost-efficient screening of proarrhythmic drug risk. Currently available hiPSC-CM models employ simple two-dimensional (2D) culture formats with limited structural and functional relevance to the human heart muscle. Here, we present the use of our 3D cardiac microphysiological system (MPS), composed of a hiPSC-derived heart micromuscle, as a platform for arrhythmia risk assessment. We employed two different hiPSC lines and tested seven drugs with known ion channel effects and known clinical risk: dofetilide and bepridil (high risk); amiodarone and terfenadine (intermediate risk); and nifedipine, mexiletine, and lidocaine (low risk). The cardiac MPS successfully predicted drug cardiotoxicity risks based on changes in action potential duration, beat waveform (i.e., shape), and occurrence of proarrhythmic events of healthy patient hiPSC lines in the absence of risk cofactors. We showcase examples where the cardiac MPS outperformed existing hiPSC-CM 2D models.