---
title: A computational study of right ventricular mechanics in a rat model of pulmonary arterial hypertension
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/a-computational-study-of
excerpt: 'Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) presents a significant challenge to right ventricular (RV) function due to progressive pressure overload, necessitating adaptive remodeling in the form of increased wall thickness, enhanced myocardial contractility and stiffness to maintain cardiac performance'
date: 2024-3-11
venue: 'Frontiers in Physiology'
paperurl: 'https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.2024.1360389/full'
authors:': 'Oscar O Odeigah, Ethan D Kwan, Kristen M Garcia, Henrik Finsberg, Daniela Valdez-Jasso, Joakim Sundnes'
---

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) presents a significant challenge to right ventricular (RV) function due to progressive pressure overload, necessitating adaptive remodeling in the form of increased wall thickness, enhanced myocardial contractility and stiffness to maintain cardiac performance. However, the impact of these remodeling mechanisms on RV mechanics in not clearly understood. In addition, there is a lack of quantitative understanding of how each mechanism individually influences RV mechanics. Utilizing experimental data from a rat model of PAH at three distinct time points, we developed biventricular finite element models to investigate how RV stress and strain evolved with PAH progression. The finite element models were fitted to hemodynamic and morphological data to represent different disease stages and used to analyze the impact of RV remodeling as well as the altered RV pressure. Furthermore, we performed a number of theoretical simulation studies with different combinations of morphological and physiological remodeling, to assess and quantify their individual impact on overall RV load and function. Our findings revealed a substantial 4-fold increase in RV stiffness and a transient 2-fold rise in contractility, which returned to baseline by week 12. These changes in RV material properties in addition to the 2-fold increase in wall thickness significantly mitigated the increase in wall stress and strain caused by the progressive increase in RV afterload. Despite the PAH-induced cases showing increased wall stress and strain at end-diastole and end-systole compared to the control, our simulations suggest that without the …
